[u'Larry Girton', u'Phil Scott', u'Annie Scott', u'Karen Michael', u'Edwin A. Halderman']
[u'New Jersey,United States', u'Connecticut,United States']
[u'Seattle,Washington,United States']

body Phil Scott     Nov 9th 2009 11:40AM 
Guys, you forgot the white-tailed deer. Each year Bambi knocks off approximately 130 people, making him the deadliest mammal in the world. How, you ask? He runs out in front of cars, the car swerves, crashes, and kills the occupants. It's in my book, Deadly: The World's Most Dangerous Everything. Annie Scott     Nov 9th 2009 6:12PM 
Thanks Phil, that's a GREAT one! I was aiming more for animals that could devour you in your sleep, but you make a really, really good point. DenverDsigner     Nov 9th 2009 11:05PM 
It's absolutely true. Same for any deer. I lost a friend in just that way... swerved to avoid a deer while driving her compact car, went out of control into the oncoming lane and was taken out by a large dump truck. 
br I haven't heard of a bobcat attack on a human in recent history, and coyote attacks are so rare that this recent one make international headlines. Mountain lions, (cougars, pumas) have attacked and killed people with much more frequency up in the mountains.... their territory. Edwin A. Halderman     Nov 10th 2009 5:12PM 
The most trouble with "ANIMALS" is that human are afriad to learn about them, from them and therefore calling them DANGERFULL and then having nothing to do with them! fyfunk     Nov 11th 2009 5:21AM 
Maybe we should feed our deer to the polar bears. BTW humans outnumber polarbear almost a hundred million to one. Karen Michael     Nov 9th 2009 12:17PM 
There are relatively few incidents of wildlife attacks on humans, while in fact it's humans who have poisoned, slaughtered, destroyed habitat, and driven many species to the point of extinction. This article is no more than inaccurate fear-mongering drivel. unroped1     Nov 9th 2009 12:36PM 
you are that one person. I would like to take hunting. there is a panther in the area where i hunt. he would love to have you for dinner. Annie Scott     Nov 9th 2009 6:12PM 
Hey Karen, sorry you feel that way! I certainly don't mean to fear-monger; I just think it's cool to remember that the places where we live used to be the wild. What did you feel was inaccurate? Debbie     Nov 10th 2009 11:27PM 
I definately agree with Human Invasion on the wildlife being part of the problem of humans being attacked and in some cases eaten.  The big message here should be that unless we figure out what to do with homeless animals who are also hungry because we take their homes away to build ours and whether you want to believe it or not they are infact a very important part of the food chain whether it is something we eat or is food for something we eat. If we don't fix this issue none of us will be around to worry about who has been attacked and what attacked them.  Insects are disappearing, reptiles, animals and mammals so believe it or not the truth is their destruction is our end. Larry Girton     Nov 9th 2009 2:11PM 
Where does the Pit Bull fit in here? Willy     Nov 9th 2009 12:38PM 
If a spider isn't an animal, is it a mineral or a vegetable? Annie Scott     Nov 9th 2009 6:13PM 
I think it's a vegetable, but I have to look it up on wikipedia ... yup, I'm right. 
br ;) Fiznatty     Nov 9th 2009 12:42PM 
What a bizarre article. 
br I'd hardly describe coyotes as "bad ass."  They're all over the place out west, including up here in Seattle, and are usually shy loners.  The attack mentioned in that article is the first time I've ever heard of a coyote-related human death.  They're not big and don't travel in packs very often, except in certain environments such as Yellowstone where tough conditions and competing predators (namely wolves) occasionally necessitate them to travel and hunt in groups of more than two or three.  Coyotes will display aggressive behavior if you approach a den site or if they've been fed... but this is hardly a vicious, bloodthirsty animal that humans should fear.  More people have probably died by tripping over their house cat than at the jaws of a coyote, but that doesn't make the house cat a bad ass animal. 
br In fact, it's important to point out that several of the species on these lists, including wolves, bears and mountain lions, will generally want to run away from you first.  I've had a couple of face-to-face encounters with mountain lions, and they were either shy or skittish, or ignored me.  There's no question they are dangerous, but typically these animals fear humans. 
br How about we replace the coyote with the bison.  It's huge and is far more dangerous to humans, and it's the only mammal that doesn't get cancer.  Now that's bad ass. ;) 
br Max Annie Scott     Nov 9th 2009 6:12PM 
I didn't know that bison doesn't get cancer, how interesting. It's true, most of these animals won't come after you unless you mess with them. We're pretty safe. However, I stand by coyotes being totally badass. Rick     Nov 9th 2009 1:15PM 
Any urbanized wild animal w/rabies is more dangerous just simply 
because of the likelihood of an encounter. skunks, racoons, possums, 
bats, etc. point pleasant nj     Nov 9th 2009 3:01PM 
Yo fiznatty...(Road runner and coyote expert extraordinaire)  You're from seattle where you have mini coyotes...or the western coyote...I'm from N.J.  where we have the eastern coyote  they grow as much as 50 lbs......care to take one or two on??  That poor woman was attacked in Nova Scotia Canada..., Thats in the east.....guess what kind of coyotes they were.....right, Eastern.....Fuggeddaboutit Celia.B     Nov 9th 2009 9:23PM 
Me and my family say that there are no bad dogs just bad owners. Tony M     Nov 9th 2009 3:56PM 
There have be Coyote sightings here in Connecticut as well as Black  Bears. I think the best thing to do is do nothing to provoke wildlife. As one person said, a rabid animal will attack without provocation. Just be careful while out in the wild. Thats all. Tony M     Nov 9th 2009 4:08PM 
A  Pit Bull is no different then any other dog that has been maltreated and trained to attack. I have never owned one but, have some wonderful friends who owned Pit Bulls; when I visited, I was able to play with the dogs and never had any aggressive behavior from them. It's not the Pit Bulls that are dangerous, it's the owners who abuse them. Fiznatty     Nov 9th 2009 5:30PM 
Interesting about the size discrepancy, but the attack still seems to be an isolated incident that is very atypical of human/coyote interactions.  Because of one person's somewhat fluky and well-publicized death, it's a nasty beast to be feared by all?  I'm sorry, I don't buy it.  Some blue whales recently attacked and sank a boat in Baja ( http://sailing-jworld.blogspot.com/2009/10/hey-all-so-it-was-eventful-day.html ).  Did they come in at #11, or are the west coast blue whales not large enough to be scary? ;) 
br Still an eastern coyote certainly sounds more intimidating than a bobcat, whose appearance on this list apparently boils down to where they place their big pointy teeth and the fact that they can get rabies (which as Rick pointed out probably makes much more common urban wildlife more dangerous). 
br And more importantly, where's hogzilla?!