[u'Toby Harndan', u'Al Gore', u'Hillary Clinton', u'Blame Bush', u'Sarah Palin', u'Barack Obama', u'Veto Obama', u'Jon Corzine', u'Jersey Hoffman', u'Jon S. Corzine', u'Teddy Roosevelt', u'Toby Harnden', u'Nixon', u'John Corzine', u'David Harmer', u'Armey', u'Jake Tapper', u'Toby Harndon', u'Christopher J. Christie', u'Creigh Deeds', u'Johnny Damon', u'Bob McDonnell', u'Chris Christie', u'Saigon', u'Bill Owens', u'John McCain', u'Dede Whats', u'Val', u'Doug Hoffman']
[u'Fairfax County,Virginia,United States', u'New Jersey,United States', u'Florida,United States', u'Virginia,United States']
[u'Bloomberg L.P.', u'NBC Inc.', u'Associated Press', u'Time Warner Inc.', u'Arab Banking Corporation (B.S.C.)', u'CBS Corporation', u'Twitter Inc', u'Chicago,Illinois,United States', u'New York,New York,United States', u'Washington,United States', u'Bangkok,Thailand', u'Imperial palace', u'New Jersey State Prison', u'Hollywood Memorial Park']

body Sunday 15 November 2009 | 
Blog Feed  |  All feeds 
By  Toby Harnden         World        Last updated:  November 4th, 2009 
Midnight update: 
So the Republicans have swept Virginia, including a landslide 17-point win for Bob McDonnell, the new governor. They’ve also captured the New Jersey governor’s mansion by a four-point margin. Both of these are very significant victories, though off-year elections are often a poor predictor of long-term trends. 
In New York’s District 23, the Democrat Bill Owens confounded expectations in a very, very strange race. This result is a setback for Sarah Palin and the conservative wing of the GOP, though they did succeed in forcing a very liberal Republican out of the contest. The local factors were so odd that it’s hard to draw too many conclusions from this. 
I am sure that McDonnell’s win, in particular, will be studied extremely carefully by Republicans in the coming months because it could provide a path to future victory – note that he emphasised fiscal conservatism, played down his social conservatism, made a (successful) play for independent voters and resisted offers for Palin to campaign for him. 
_______________________________________ 
According to White House officials, President Barack Obama has no interest in tonight’s election results and will instead be watching basketball on television. The Democratic spin is that if Republicans were to win back the governor’s mansions in Virginia and New??Jersey and Doug Hoffman was to triumph in New York’s 23rd District that would say nothing at all about what voters think about Mr Obama. Yeah, right. 
Well, here in Virginia (I reside in McLean, in the DC suburbs) the Republican candidate Bob McDonnell has just trounced his Democratic opponent Creigh Deeds. GOP candidates also won the Virginia lieutenant-governor and attorney general races. 
Remember, Virginia was the state that the Obama campaign argued would reshape the political map – he won it big over Hillary Clinton in the primaries and then beat John McCain there last November. So what happened to all those newly-registered Democrats in Virginia. It seems that large numbers of them stayed at home. Some must have voted Republican. And the independents who went heavily for Obama? They backed McDonnell. 
Exit polls  in Virginia found that four out of 10 voters said their vote was affected by what they thought of Mr Obama. So the notion that this had nothing to do with the President simply won’t fly. The exit polls also indicated that independents in New Jersey fled from the Democratic incumbent Jon Corzine to Chris Christie, the Republican. 
There is no sign that American voters are falling head over heels for the Republican party – far from it. But the story from tonight might be that it was the first concrete indication that voters began to tire of their love affair with Barack Obama. 
COMMENTS 
McLean?  Isn’t that Washington’s communist enclave? 
I’ve got my fingers crossed for New Jersey. Hard to pick a bluer State than that.  If they keep Corzine, then the sane should head to Florida and leave the rest to their miserable fate. 
“According to White House officials, President Barack Obama has no interest in tonight???s election results and will instead be watching basketball on television.”TH 
So, in other words he doesen’t give a hoot either about Afghanistan or the rising unemployment situation…or anything else it would seem except his damn Social Engineering…and basketball on TV. Idiot. 
With 28% in, it’s 50% Christie vs. 44% Corzine. 
“I???ve got my fingers crossed for New Jersey.” Fernandez 
Unfortunately ACORN workers don’t have their fingers crossed, they are busy stuffing ballot boxes with bogus cards, which will amazingly be ‘found’ tomorrow afternoon. 
Last year I was one of those Europeans who wished that Obama would become the new president of the United States. I rightly thought that he would know much better than John McCain how to communicate with Europeans. However, I never wanted him to make America look more like Europe. Unfortunately, that’s what he’s doing right now. This is especially true with regard to America’s foreign policy. How strange it is that these days it’s not the American president, but the French president who seems to be a hawk with regard to Iran. While French diplomacy has become more “American” in recent years, American diplomacy looks more and more as if it was inspired by the d??tente-philosophy of the former French president Val??ry Giscard d’Estaing. Perhaps Obama should remember that Giscard was just a one-term president. If Obama wants to be re-elected in 2012, he mustn’t try to copy Val??ry Giscard d’Estaing. 
This just in: The Huffiington Post is reporting that the results from the following: 
Fairmount Cemetary in Newark, NJ: 93% Corzine, 1% Christie, 6%Daggett 
Hollywood Memorial Park in Union: 95% Corzine, 5% Daggett, 0% Christie 
Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in Parsippany: 94% Corzine, 4% Daggett, 2% Christie 
New Jersey State Prison, Trenton: 90% Corzine, 5% Christie, 5% Daggett 
Jake Tapper (ABC News) on Twitter reports: 
NBC’s “The Biggest Loser” is at the White House tonight. This is not a joke. 
Enasharples – LOL!  These elections shouldn’t be so close to Halloween! 
“I never wanted him to make America look more like Europe. Unfortunately, that???s what he???s doing right now. This is especially true with regard to America???s foreign policy.” tbw 
Foreign Policy? he has no FP…unless you call Blame Bush, Can’t We All Just Get Along and Aren’t I Great! some sort of an attempt at FP. 
Tee hee. 
Obama is not only the biggest loser.  he’s the biggest risk to world peace. 
This is the worst government and the most ignorant, arrogant and dangerous one ever. 
FOX NEWS IS DECLARING NEW JERSEY FOR THE REPUBLICAN CHRISTIE 
OBAMA IS BLOODIED. OBAMA IS REPUDIATED 
At about 10:20 PM New Jersey time, the news networks (Fox News, CBS and the Associated Press) have projected that Christie has won. 
No early word yet from NY-23.  And the polls remain open in CA-10, where I cast my vote earlier for the Republican David Harmer for Congress. 
Here’s hoping that the results in those two by-elections are more salt in the Democratic Party’s wounds. 
abc news now projecting Republican wins in BOTH Virginia and New Jersey.  Corzine’s toast. 
Where’s Stevie G tonight? 
Probably watching basketball…. 
‘Where???s Stevie G tonight?’ 
He’s got to write about 100,000 absentee ballots before morning!  Busy little bee… 
So, now, what’s happening in NY23? 
Not much leg tingling tonight over at MSNBC. 
i think the novelty has worn off. the ‘first time voters’ went back to their x-boxes. 
The Jacobin in NJ is conceding now. 
Oh steviiieeee, oooh steeeviieee. Now where is that rascal hiding? Oh steviiieee. Your messiah just got his butt handed to him. What sayest thou? LOL 
NJ and Va both have Republican governors now. In NY-23 there is a slight lead for Owens but it is still early on. 
TBW: I think that a lot of support for Obama was more a triumph of idealism and the desire to want to believe something than a victory for logic and realism. McCain was a flawed candidate, fatally so it turns out but he somehow still had a sense of how the world really works. Obama did and still does not. 
Hi there! 
Governors’ races are always local. They are state officials. 
Neither of the races was run on national issues. In NJ, John Corzine apparently had earned the acute animosity of voters. Christie promised property tax cuts without a means to deliver them or pay for them. Not being a resident it was hard to gauge how much Corzine was disliked, even though he lagged by almost 20 points until a couple of months ago. 
In Virginia, it was a good candidate versus a very bad one. Like Al Gore, Deeds earned his loss. I have no idea of what the state issues were in Virginia. 
In a fit of pure political vengeance and hatred, it appears as though the local Republicans decided they did not want extremists like Palin and Armey telling them what to do and at last look voted for Owens over Hoffman. I’m glad Owens has probably won, but I think it’s local voter resentment of interference than anything else. 
I know you are all being egged on by people like Toby and huddled around your sets watching Fox, so you won’t believe anything history says about the local nature of governor’s races. 
This is not an indicator of anything. I thought Corzine might win, but as I stated before, that would not have changed the reality of gubernatorial contests. 
Good luck to you. You are going to need it in 2010 when a minor based party without viable issues confronts the realities of politics in the national elections. 
PS, I was watching the local results on TV. Bloomberg is winning by maybe a 3% margin, which really isn’t too hot considering he spend $100 million and his opponent had $6 million. 
SteviePoo: hehe. 
Does Christie have a speech impediment 
“The Jacobin in NJ is conceding now.” VP 
Corzine is conceding on Fox. On MSNBC Olberman was doing Johnny Damon highlights. CNN had a Viagra commercial…go figure. 
“Does Christie have a speech impediment?”VP 
No, he just ate the whole Applebee’s menu when he found out he won. 
Fernandez 
Northern VA is always considered horribly Republican by people in DC, and communist by the rest of VA. 
Tonight, Fairfax County is in GOP hands again, in terms of Gov vote anyway:138,470 votes for McDonnell 50.74% 
I just realized .. this will be the last night of governmental good news until about a year from now. 
Until then I suspect we’ll be collapsing..  the question will be at what rate… and will our Islamic enemies split some atoms over our land. 
Even the NYT recognizes the implications: 
“Christopher J. Christie, a Republican former United States attorney who said he would vanquish corruption from the halls of New Jersey government, won the New Jersey governor???s race on Tuesday, defeating the incumbent, Gov. Jon S. Corzine, and striking a blow against the Democratic party on a national stage.” 
Fox News projects that Owens has beaten Hoffman.  Also, CA-10 seems to be following conventional wisdom (that it’s a solid Democrat seat). 
Even bigger deal, Corzine just lost New Jersey.  Even SEIU couldn’t rig the results for him. So there may be hope that this far left express train to being a socialist, broke, debt-ridden, middling military power may slowed and in 2010 completely derailed. 
No matter what the Dems do to remind voters why they’re dangerous to empower, the GOP will always be there to remind them how stupid and self-defeating they are. 
Of course Corzine leaves the usual Democrat induced statewide disaster in his wake. 
msher1 what the vote is saying they lack confidence in the current administration and this amounts to a protest vote. 
What the GOP lacks is a coherent policy to sustain this momentum, they need a Newt Gringrich moment when the GOP had clearly defined policies they said they would try to implement.  (Whether you agreed with those policies is a whole other discussion). 
Yes even 2010 I suspect the protest vote to make bigger gains, but what will happen when they meet Mr Veto Obama and no clear majority to over ride this. 
The GOP needs to hunker down plan and stratigize and for once listen to the grassroots protest movements going on, it can not be business as usual. 
Or Obama and the Dems can then point at the GOP and say it is all there fault. 
Steve – How are Governor’s races local and congressional districts (much smaller and more local), national?  Especially with Corzine cleaving himself to Obama at every opportunity. 40% in exit polls say they did vote against Obama.   You’re in denial. 
NY23:  Had the party bosses held a primary or at least not picked a Democrat in Republican clothing, Owen would have lost. The combined Dede Whats-her-name (5%) and Hoffman (46%) votes exceed Owens’ (49%) vote.  Owens won because the county GOP leaders screwed up.  Still a win’s a win. 
The lesson for the GOP bosses (and the pols in Washington) is either to listen to the people or get out of the way. 
I wouldn’t be surprised if we find out about heavy arm-twisting by the White House on the local players in that NY District.  I bet the White House was involved in teh selection of that woman as the candidate. 
crownarmourer @5:23 am 
We keep meeting in all the strangest places! 
No argument with your post. But tonight may have bought a little breathing room. It will I think lose some votes on health care. Corzine recognized that and made a point of saying in his concession speech that his defeat wasn’t a defeat of the health care bill. (Oh yeah, well then why did he think he had to mention that?) Hopefully it also means cap and trade, and give aways in Copenhagen for the “climate change” damage we have caused will have a rougher time. 
Toby Harndon 
I’m not new to DT blogs, but I have only been on your blog once or twice before. Would you clarify, please, as to what it means to be the DT’s “U.S. editor.” Is that the same thing as being the Washington bureau chief? 
“I wouldn???t be surprised if we find out about heavy arm-twisting by the White House on the local players in that NY District. I bet the White House was involved in teh selection of that woman as the candidate.”VP 
Tis the Chicago way. Safe 9 term Republican Rep. McHugh was enticed away by Obama to be Sec of the Army, and the WH saw a chance to gangbang the seat, so you know there were some shaenanigans going on. 
Couple that with the Keystone Kops style handling of the situation by the GOP honchos and the scene was set and ripe for a very weird scenario. 
msher1 yes it has brought breathing space I just hope the GOP still go out and listen to the people, the Dems are going to do a scorched earth policy and leave a horrible mess to deal with.  I don’t see a future GOP president yet. 
As an aside quickly told the missus we are not moving back to the UK whiles’t it is clearly under the fourth Reich and democracy has fallen for now, she has a romantic notion of my country as pretty as it is especially in Northumbria.  For some resaon it reminds her of home. 
ALL of Obama’s proposals are designed to increase unemployement,  increase people flocking for more welfare.. these Democrats seek to bring Marxist Collectivism to America buy totally destroying our economic system 
Mission almost accomplished. 
VinceP1974 not a Dem plan but he answers to some very rich people that bought him the Presidency like Soros. 
Obama is simply a muppet what the rich want is an impoverished and vastly shrunk middle class, and a cheap workforce what better way to get richer and richer although ultimately it means a contraction of overall wealth and stagnation of the world economy.  A slide to new dark age with them as our new Kings and Queens, they want chaos as they think they can control it’s direction, think again once that starts all bets are off.  You can’t eat gold.  Unless people wake up we have a short window to fix things and taxing billionaires at 99.99% of income would be a start. 
Wealth creation and making money are okay in my book but when a small handful of people use it to abuse power then we have a problem. 
VinceP1974 what scares me most is that I think unless we can do things the nice way it will lead to war, civil and global.  America is basically bankrupt and can no longer support a vast military machine keeping the Pax Americana, it is a country in a very deep recession which has lots of talented people yet it imports cheap labor to take the jobs from Americans on the spurious grounds they can’t find anyone to do the job. 
crownarmourer 
Reminds her of home??? I unexpectedly found myself one fine day in 1972 in Saigon. (Civilian Pan Am flight from Hong Kong to Bangkok unexpectedly diverted to Saigon and made a landing. Never any explanation given. 4 hours in boarded up, defended hut on tarmac before re-boarding plane and resuming flight to Bangkok.) Point is that I had a chance to see much of the country from the air. Mostly jungle and rice paddies, as far as I could see. Didn’t think there were a lot of jungles and rice paddies in England. Also, I have spent time in jungles. Hot and humid. Didn’t think England was hot and humid, in the tropics sense. At least never when I’ve been there. 
___________ 
Yes, breathing room. Whoever Toby Harndan is – i.e., whatever his title means, I doubt he often posts at midnight unless he thinks there is some significance in an event. 
msher1 my wife comes from Hue and although she was really young remembers a city bordered by mountains and the sea with a river flowing nearby.  She did this from the palace walls of the imperial city in Hue.  Apparently it’s very cloudy there just like Northeast England. 
As a really young child she did not remember it’s name but she did provide me with enough information to go on, she remembered the throne rooms the giant urns which she used to hide in from servants forever chasing her, the purple the gold and reds, the dragons and ornate carvings, the wide verandas etc.  Only one place matches her descriptions and it’s the purple city in Hue the Imperial palace. 
Took me six months of research to track it down. 
She is not royalty as they had left by then but she is connected to a very important family in power at the time. 
Her life was saved due to the American military I think disobeying orders during a coup ordered by a well loved President who very shortly after wards paid a terrible price. 
I think that gives you a time line. 
As she is only 50% Vietnamese and 50% European as confirmed oddly enough by an eye doctor apparently we have a blue ring around the Corneas that full blooded Asians lack. 
I think she was placed there as someone crossed those interracial boundaries and that was unthinkable in that culture but because her mother was someone well place she was well taken care of. 
msher1 if you knew her life story you would be amazed, it would make a great book and would be number one on Oprah’s list.  Her adopted parents in the USA are another story altogether and her adopted dad has lots of influence in high circles. 
Unfortunately for me we are currently on the bad list I’m keeping a low profile until I can mend some fences. 
Her adopted Granny was friends with Teddy Roosevelt. 
crownarmourer – sounds as if you won the jackpot! 
What does it tell everyone, when POTUS says he is too busy watching basketball to note his ass being handed to him? They should haul a trailer round to Penn Ave to make him feel more at home. 
But Steve said the Obamesiah would win!!! 
Stevie, what happened man? 
45govt actually no, my father in law is way too connected he could make my life a living hell if he wanted to.  He’s known every president since Nixon. With a few phone calls my ass and career is grass. 
As for my wife she did have a career in modeling and she is that good looking.  The exotic east meets west look. 
As for POTUS it looks like he is not in charge he is getting his orders from his handlers and the money is good, but he needs to ditch Chewbacca his wife. 
Well as we say in the South goodnight ya’ll.  Late for me and the bosses won’t be happy with my sorry draggin ass. 
As for lucky I get paid to look at porn at work oh woe is me. 
These results mean absolutely nothing. Americans vote in the most peculiar way, and for the most peculiar reasons, more than the British. As the more reliable and more obj...