[u'John Nichols', u'Lindsay Lohan', u'Al Gore', u'Trig', u'Michelle Obama', u'Rick Warren', u'Keith Olbermann', u'Sarah Palin', u'Jon', u'Levi Johnston', u'Kate', u'Linda Hirshman', u'Robert Dreyfuss', u'Eric Alterman', u'Melissa Harris-Lacewell', u"Bill O'Reilly", u'Peter Rothberg', u'Angela Merkel']

[u'Google Inc.', u'Washington,United States', u'Paris Hilton', u'Oslo opera house']

body This article appeared in the December 14, 2009 edition of 
Search for:      Search in:     2003 - present   1865 - 2002 archives 
Password 
Remember? Last Column About Sarah Palin--Ever  Subject to Debate By   Katha Pollitt November 24, 2009 
Going Rogue  has been out only a day or two as I write, and I've already read so many blogs and columns and articles and reviews and participated in so many listserv discussions about it, I'm sick to death not only of Sarah Palin but of Palin-related snark, outrage, ruminations and fact checks. I don't want to follow the timeline of Bristol's pregnancy on  Vanity Fair 's website. I don't want to delve into how many hockey games this self-described hockey mom actually attended or how many moose she really shot. I don't want to find out the back story behind her digs at Levi Johnston or the McCain campaign. Fish in a barrel! You know something's gone off the rails when the ferociously smart Linda Hirshman defends Palin's charging her $150,000 campaign wardrobe to the McCain campaign (or possibly, depending on whom you believe, not) at the Daily Beast on the grounds that, unlike stylish Michelle Obama, she doesn't have a rich husband to pay for her clothes--and when writers hammer away at this thesis for seventy posts on a listserv. All right, I admit I wrote several of those posts. And, yes, I am writing this column. What is it about this absurd woman that is so fascinating? 2012: The Year of Sarahpocalypse 
Countdown  :   Keith Olbermann sounds off on Sarah Palin's apocalyptic political career, and what we can really expect in the future. It Isn't Easy Being Pro-Palin 
New Left Media  :   It's not just the left that can't understand the appeal of Sarah Palin. Even her supporters have hard time explaining themselves. Last Column About Sarah Palin--Ever 
Katha Pollitt :   We can't stop looking at our first female political train wreck. Whose Team Is It, Anyway? 
Katha Pollitt :   Prochoicers have been taking one for the team for too long now. Enough already. Working Women: Strength in Numbers 
Katha Pollitt :   First feminism was dead because it was a "failure"; now it's dead because it was such a success. 
It is indeed annoying to have Palin paradoxes thrown in one's feminist face all day. You see, says conventional wisdom, you said women should just vote for women, and look what you got! (Note to CW: feminists never said women should vote for women just because of their gender. They said women should vote for feminists.) But parsing the feminist semiotics of Sarah Palin is getting as old as all those articles about why teenage girls love vampires. Someday there will be whole women's studies conferences devoted to her, the way there used to be scholarly panels on Madonna. Maybe even endowed chairs of Palin studies. But does feminism really have all that much to do with her apotheosis? 
The one thing Palin seems to know how to do is use the media's infatuation with celebrity, hotness and women's bodies to aggrandize herself. As Bill O'Reilly told her, "You are the biggest threat because you are a star.... There aren't any other Republicans who are media stars but you." Except for her politics, she's the living embodiment of the constantly updated Huffington Post cover page, in which Washington reporting and Jon and Kate and assorted pushers of quackery and psychobabble jostle against a constant stream of semi-naked photos of semi-celebs, whose breasts and cosmetic surgeries you are invited to rate. For her fans she may be a goddess of vitality and truth, but for everyone else she's the first political female train wreck, the Paris Hilton or Lindsay Lohan of the Republican Party. We can't stop looking. Maybe she'll confuse Iran and Iraq again! And tell about praying on the phone with Rick Warren while taking a shower! Or write another letter in God's voice about her baby, Trig! Maybe Palin is cosmic payback for all those nasty jokes about Hillary's pantsuits and thick ankles, and for the mighty cry of  borrring!  that goes up all over the media whenever a politician--Al Gore?--displays actual knowledge of a complex subject. You wanted hot and relatable? You got it. 
It doesn't have to be this way. Consider Angela Merkel. The press (the foreign press, mostly) went wild when she wore a low-cut gown to the opening of the Oslo opera house last year. If you Google her, "Angela Merkel cleavage" is the first suggested search term that comes up--but Merkel herself doesn't engage with media-style hyped-up feminine self-presentation. She dresses in a nondescript way, doesn't wear a lot of makeup--in fact, she looks like she doesn't wear any makeup--and her hair is so ordinary, I can't even remember how she wears it. Her husband is not part of her day-to-day story. She is a middle-age woman with a PhD in physics, a pleasant lined face and a low-key, straightforward manner. Even people who would never vote for her seem to respect her as a human being. So far as I know, there are no Angela Merkel nutcrackers or plastic dolls in slutty costumes for sale on the Internet. 
It is so restful, you can't believe it. 
Name 
Mailing Address 
City 
State                  Alabama       Alaska       Arizona       Arkansas       California       Colorado       Connecticut       Delaware       District of Columbia       Florida       Georgia       Hawaii       Idaho       Illinois       Indiana       Iowa       Kansas       Kentucky       Louisiana       Maine       Maryland       Massachusetts       Michigan       Minnesota       Mississippi       Missouri       Montana       Nebraska       Nevada       New Hampshire       New Jersey       New Mexico       New York       North Carolina       North Dakota       Ohio       Oklahoma       Oregon       Pennsylvania       Rhode Island       South Carolina       South Dakota       Tennessee       Texas       Utah       Vermont       Virginia       Washington       West Virginia       Wisconsin       Wyoming 
ZIP Code 
Email Address 
» Editor's Cut 
Around the Nation  |  In pursuit of the truth on Blackwater's secret war in Pakistan. Plus: our team in Copenhagen, and a great way to help  The Nation . 
Katrina vanden Heuvel 
Posted at 11:13 ET 
» The  Beat 
Sanders Stands on Principle: No Reform w/out Public Option  |  More senators should join him in fight to assure that "a strong bill is passed which provides universal coverage in a cost-effective way." 
John Nichols 
297 Comments 
» Altercation 
Slacker Friday  |  Youthful quota hires go hunting; fun holiday games. 
Eric Alterman 
» The Notion 
Bad Black Mothers   |  For African American women, reproduction has never been an entirely private matter. 
Melissa Harris-Lacewell 
107 Comments 
» Act Now! 
Coal Country  |  Stunning film reveals new dimensions to the cost of America's over-reliance on coal. 
Peter Rothberg 
144 Comments 
» The Dreyfuss Report 
A Kingdom of Bicycles No Longer  |  China's ambassador for climate change speaks on the eve of the Copenhagen summit meeting. 
Robert Dreyfuss 
68 Comments