[u'Margi Rivara', u'Alex Truglio', u'Gregg Lerner', u'Carmela Pagliarulo', u'Carly Eskenazi', u'Alli Speck', u'Caroline Broder', u'Brittney Albrecht', u'Jen Andresen', u'Marissa Cerniglia', u'Ashley Betts', u'Samantha Cermack', u'Emma Campbell', u'Meg Ayers', u'Kasey Damiano', u'Meagan Morris', u'Sara Haefli', u'Sloan DePiero', u'Nikki Hernandez', u'Nicole Lee', u'Rachel Vaccaro', u'Sarah Cortes', u'Tara Corbett', u'Kristyn Tremblay', u'Emily Bos', u'Morris Knolls  Morris Knolls', u'Amy Verdonik', u'Avery Jackson', u'Chalen Noble', u'Stephanie Hallihan', u'Hannah Steadman', u'Filamena Martini', u'Morris Knolls', u'Juliana Lacey', u'Kerri Bergin', u'Amanda Brown', u'Erika Joab', u'Lexi Knief', u'Zahra Mion', u'Glen Rock', u'Ari Sarkisian', u'Kelly Cullinane', u'Julie Bos', u'Julie Vajda', u'Kelsey Wheeler', u'Megan Halsch', u'Emily Zimick', u'Megan Lannigan', u'Matt Rainey', u'Sarah Halejian']
[u'North Carolina,United States']
[u'The Star Tribune Company', u'Midland Park']

body November 07, 2009, 10:21AM NJ GIRLS SOCCER: North Jersey, Section 1 Sectional Semis Preview  By  Gregg Lerner/For The Star-Ledger 
Ridgewood (17-3-1) at Morris Knolls (14-3-1) 
There aren’t many sides hotter than Ridgewood right now. The Maroons have won nine straight, including a little extraction of revenge on Thursday with a 2-1 shootout victory over Roxbury, a team that pinned it with a 4-0 setback on Oct. 3. Senior forward Samantha Cermack (17 goals, 9 assists) is extremly efficient around the net.  Matt Rainey/The Star-Ledger Christina Vittorio (2) of Morris Knolls  Morris Knolls has won two straight, stamped by its own atonement on Thursday when it defeated Randolph,   which handed a 1-0 loss on Oct. 2, 3-2, in a match decided by a shootout. Megan Halsch (9 goals, eight assists) has been a steady presence. The fact both have already been involved in a shootout should take a lit of the edge off if the contest boils down to shots from the 12-yard spot.   
p Kearny (19-2) at Montclair (14-2-3) 
In 2006 and 2007, Kearny eliminated Montclair in the sectional final. And, don’t think Meagan Morris (18 goals) has forgotten it. The tenacious senior mid, who is heading to North Carolina, is the ultimate competitor but beyond that, it will be imperative for her to set an early tone that the Mounties follow, one defenders Sara Haefli and 
Amanda Brown/The-Star-Ledger Erika Joab (21) of Montclair 
This marks the fourth meeting of the year between these two, who bring out the best in each other. Northern Highlands is 2-0-1 in the series this fall, which should only stoke Ramapo’s fire. Senior Tara Corbett (18 goals, nine assists) has accumulated 10 goals over the last six contests. Keeper Caroline Broder and junior defender Kerri Bergin are integral to a Northern Highlands defense that’s posted 15 shutouts and has given up five goals all year. Ramapo, defending Group 3 state champion, features explosive freshman forward Jen Andresen (21 goals) and two game-changing midfielders in junior Sarah Halejian and senior Avery Jackson. Oh, and it’s won this sectional five straight years and 14 of the last 15 years. The one interruption – Northern Highlands sectional champion in 2003. 
  
Demarest (10-9) at Paramus (13-6-2) 
Emily Zimick (six goals) came up with the biggest goal of the season Thursday to lift Demarest past Jefferson, 1-0. Demarest has rediscovered its success from earlier this season when it jumped out to a 7-2 start. It has won three straight and the defense has stiffened, giving up just one goal in that span. Paramus will test the stoutness of that resistance with very balanced attack that can come from various directions. Sarah Cortes (11 goals), Megan Lannigan (23 goals, 13 assists), Stephanie Hallihan (seven goals, five assists) and Kelly Cullinane will lead the offensive charge. 
  
Glen Rock (17-2) at Kinnelon (19-2-2) 
Defense has long been a staple for Glen Rock. And, Kinnelon comes after opponents with a well-oiled offense. Those components should make this one a classic. Glen Rock has posted seven consecutive shutouts, giving it 16 on the season. Not bad for a squad that lost eight starters to graduation from a year ago. Senior defender Meg Ayers and the goalkeeping combination of sophomore Margi Rivara and senior Cat Guariglia have been downright dominating. It has yielded just four goals all season. WOW!  Up steps Kinnelon, the two-time Morris County Tournament champion (it shared the crown this year with West Morris). Offense (78 goals) has been a problem and why would it be with components like Ashley Betts (22 goals), Carmela Pagliarulo (16 goals) and freshman Chalen Noble (19 goals) running up top. Defensively, Kelsey Wheeler organizes a tight back line in front of sensation junior keeper Hannah Steadman (11 shutouts). And, midfielders Carly Eskenazi and Alli Speck work tirelessly at both ends of the pitch. 
  
Ramsey (12-6-1) at Mahwah (15-4-1) 
Few secrets between these two, who will meet for a third time. They played to a scoreless draw on Opening Day and Ramsey posted a 2-1 victory. Instrumental in that triumph was senior Sloan DePiero (13 goals, 9 assists), who netted both scores. Sophomore Lexi Knief (12 goals, 6 assists) has developed into a nice complement up top. Mahwah counters with a squad brimming with confidence. It has won 10 of its last 11 with the lone loss a 2-0 setback to Immaculate Heart. Senior mid Brittney Albrecht (11 goals, 7 assists) controls well while junior Nicole Lee (13 goals, 8 assists) add to the play in the neutral third. Alex Truglio (9 goals, 6 assists), Jordyn Davis (5 goals, 11 assists) and Kristyn Tremblay  enhance the offensive package.  
  
Midland Park (13-6-1) at Cresskill (19-1) 
Treading water at 3-4 near the end of September, Midland Park has turned things up over the last month. Senior Julie Vajda, who missed all of last season with an ACL injury, has regained her commanding form with 17 goals and 15 assists. Easing her burden in the middle is the emergence of Emily Bos, Kasey Damiano, Zahra Mion and Julie Bos. It hasn't yielded a goal in the state tournament and outscored its first two opponents, 12-0. 
Midland Park will be hard-pressed to silence Cresskill's overwhelming offense (91 goals). Seniors Floriana Borova (19 goals) and Nikki Hernandez (10 goals, 14 assists),  long-standing fixtures in the scoring mix, and sophomore Emma Campbell (10 goals, 10 assists) made the offense dynamic but introduce Ari Sarkisian (23 goals and 9 assists) into the offensive equation and it's becomes clear why Cresskill is scoring at such a rate. 
  
Butler (5-14) at Emerson (13-8) 
Who is happier with the new format of open-brackets more than Butler? It's 3-14 record entering the most season certainly struck fear in no one. But, a closer look reveals the Morris County team dropped six one-goal matches in the regular season, including a string of 2-1 losses to Villa Walsh, Morristown-Beard and Mountain Lakes at mid-season. This squad was hammered by graduation but has rallied together in the tournament and gotten a flip in fortune, posting 2-1 triumphs over Saddle Brook and Belvidere. Junior midfielder Rachel Vaccaro (10 goals) contributed a goal and an assist in each of those triumphs and sophomore forward Amy Verdonik has elevated her play. It got a big lift against Belvidere with the return of sophomore Filamena Martini, who has been absent from the lineup since the fourth game due to injury, but stamped her comeback by netting the decisive goal. 
Emerson has come a long way from its 0-3 start. A revamped offense has seen major contributions from Juliana Lacey (12 goals, 17 assists), Marissa Cerniglia (16 goals). Defensively, its blanked its last three opponents, including a 1-0 shutout over second-seeded Park Ridge in the quarters.