[u'GRETCHEN REYNOLDS SAYS', u'John Ratey', u'Benjamin Greenwood', u'Michael Hopkins', u'Tomas Anthony']
[u'Colorado,United States']
[u'The Times Global Broadcasting Co Ltd', u'The New York Times Co', u'Chicago,Illinois,United States']

body November 18, 2009,  Phys Ed: Why Exercise Makes You Less Anxious 
Researchers at Princeton University recently made a remarkable discovery about the brains of rats that exercise. Some of their neurons respond differently to stress than the neurons of slothful rats. Scientists have known for some time that exercise stimulates the creation of new brain cells (neurons) but not how, precisely, these neurons might be functionally different from other brain cells. 
In the experiment, preliminary results of which were presented last month at the  annual meeting  of the Society for Neuroscience in Chicago, scientists allowed one group of rats to run. Another set of rodents was not allowed to exercise. Then all of the rats swam in cold water, which they don???t like to do. Afterward, the scientists examined the animals??? brains. They found that the stress of the swimming activated neurons in all of the brains. (The researchers could tell which neurons were activated because the cells expressed specific genes in response to the stress.) But the youngest brain cells in the running rats, the cells that the scientists assumed were created by running, were less likely to express the genes. They generally remained quiet. The ???cells born from running,??? the researchers concluded, appeared to have been ???specifically buffered from exposure to a stressful experience.??? The rats had created, through running, a brain that seemed biochemically, molecularly, calm. 
For years, both in popular imagination and in scientific circles, it has been a given that exercise enhances mood. But how exercise, a physiological activity, might directly affect mood and anxiety — psychological states — was unclear. Now, thanks in no small part to improved research techniques and a growing understanding of the biochemistry and the genetics of thought itself, scientists are beginning to tease out how exercise remodels the brain, making it more resistant to stress.  In  work undertaken  at the University of Colorado, Boulder, for instance, scientists have examined the role of serotonin, a neurotransmitter often considered to be the ???happy??? brain chemical. That simplistic view of serotonin has been undermined by other researchers, and the University of Colorado work further dilutes the idea. In those experiments, rats taught to feel helpless and anxious, by being exposed to a laboratory stressor, showed increased serotonin activity in their brains. But rats that had run for several weeks before being stressed showed less serotonin activity and were less anxious and helpless despite the stress. 
Other researchers have looked at how exercise alters the activity of dopamine, another neurotransmitter in the brain, while still others have concentrated on the antioxidant powers of moderate exercise. Anxiety in rodents and people has been linked with excessive oxidative stress, which can lead to cell death, including in the brain. Moderate exercise, though, appears to dampen the effects of oxidative stress. In an experiment led by researchers at the University of Houston and reported at the Society for Neuroscience meeting, rats whose oxidative-stress levels had been artificially increased with injections of certain chemicals were extremely anxious when faced with unfamiliar terrain during laboratory testing. But rats that had exercised, even if they had received the oxidizing chemical, were relatively nonchalant under stress. When placed in the unfamiliar space, they didn???t run for dark corners and hide, like the unexercised rats. They insouciantly explored. 
???It looks more and more like the positive stress of exercise prepares cells and structures and pathways within the brain so that they???re more equipped to handle stress in other forms,??? says Michael Hopkins, a graduate student affiliated with the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory Laboratory at Dartmouth, who has been studying how exercise differently affects thinking and emotion. ???It???s pretty amazing, really, that you can get this translation from the realm of purely physical stresses to the realm of psychological stressors.??? 
The stress-reducing changes wrought by exercise on the brain don???t happen overnight, however, as virtually every researcher agrees. In the University of Colorado experiments, for instance, rats that ran for only three weeks did not show much reduction in stress-induced anxiety, but those that ran for at least six weeks did. ???Something happened between three and six weeks,??? says Benjamin Greenwood, a research associate in the Department of Integrative Physiology at the University of Colorado, who helped conduct the experiments. Dr. Greenwood added that it was ???not clear how that translates??? into an exercise prescription for humans. We may require more weeks of working out, or maybe less. And no one has yet studied how intense the exercise needs to be. But the lesson, Dr. Greenwood says, is ???don???t quit.??? Keep running or cycling or swimming. (Animal experiments have focused exclusively on aerobic, endurance-type activities.) You may not feel a magical reduction of stress after your first jog, if you haven???t been exercising. But the molecular biochemical changes will begin, Dr. Greenwood says. And eventually, he says, they become ???profound.??? From 1 to 25 of 216 Comments 
This information I learned from this post will give me more motivation to visit the gym during the long winter ahead. Thanks! 
Oh, and TPP, congratulations on finishing your first marathon. 
I theorize that this effect could be due to endocannabinoids. Here are a couple of papers that support my hypothesis: 
1. Cannabinoids Promote Neurogenesis In The Brain, Study Says 
Baltimore, MD: The administration of synthetic cannabinoids promotes the proliferation of newborn neurons (nerve cells) in the rat brain which likely accounts for the drug’s anti-anxiety and mood elevating effects, according to preclinical trial data published today in The Journal of Clinical Investigation. 
2. Exercise activates the endocannabinoid system 
Extensive documentation exists showing that exercise induces analgesia and sedation.Despite decades of research attempting to explicate a neurochemical basis for these phenomena, the mechanism underlying these changes is unknown. 
Using trained male college students running on a treadmill or cycling on a stationary bike for 50min at 70^80% of maximum heart rate, we report here the ??rst evidence that exercise of moderate intensity activates the endocannabinoid system, suggesting a new mechanism for exercise-induced analgesia and possibly other physiological and psychological adaptations to exercise. 
NeuroReport 14:2209^2211 
These results are not surprising. Personally speaking, I’d be a very grumpy and anxious person without strenuous exercise. It’s as essential to my mental health as eating and sleeping. 
I agree. 
GRETCHEN REYNOLDS SAYS: I agree, too. 
I believe further research will support what I have seen with clients and what I experienced myself which is: 
The best results are achieved with a combination of the right intensity and complexity of training coupled with Play. 
Why:  Without a intimate and mindful connection to exercise and a sense of purpose becomes very difficult to maintain the level and duration of exercise needed to get the reduction in stress and anxiety. 
My personal and professional experience supports this research.  I suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) due to a combination of events including financial stress, the premature birth of my baby girl, chopping off my finger tip and other stresses all within a very short period of time. This pushed me over the edge I developed some serious anxiety problems. 
The only thing that got me back to “normal” was a prolonged, variable intensity training and play: 
In my case it was high intensity training and surfing. 
For other clients of mine it was hiking and training. 
Whatever, you choose, make sure that your exercise choice is not “mindless on a machine”.   The more intimately connected you are to the training the better the results. 
Tomas Anthony 
everyday athlete ?? 
I highly recommend for anyone who suffers from general anxiety or prolonged stress to begin a systematic and progressive program of training. 
“For years, both in popular imagination and in scientific circles, it has been a given that exercise enhances mood.” 
well, i wonder if this can explain the seeming near addiction to daily exercise? 
off to the gym….  ^_^ 
Anyone who has been exercising for awhile knows how good it makes you feel and how it tamps down anxiety and stress. 
But, it sure helps to understand how exactly the process works!  Thanks, Gretchen for all your enlightening research. 
Dr. John Ratey, an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard, and author of, Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain, says: 
“We all know that exercise makes us feel better, but most of us have no idea why. 
We assume it’s because  we’re burning off stress or reducing muscle tension or boosting endorphins, and we leave it at that. 
But the real reason we feel so good when we get our blood pumping is that it makes the brain function at its best, and in my view, this benefit of physical activity is far more important—and fascinating—than what it does for the body. 
Building muscles and conditioning the heart and lungs are essentially side effects.  I often tell my patients that the point of exercise is to build and condition the brain.” 
Taking Care of Yourself When Your Brain’s Screaming: “I Don’t Feel Like It!” 
Maybe everyone who is so upset about the mammogram guidelines change should take a quick jog.  It might make them feel better. 
6 weeks is a VERY long time in a rat’s life for the benefit of exercise to appear.  The implication, if we were to translate this benefit to humans, is that we would need to exercise regularly for at least a year before seeing the permanent stress-reducing effects. 
It seems like a long time, but it’s worth it. 
I do feel less stressed immediately after a run, but know that the effect is short-lived. 
A good teaching moment. It has been observed for a long time that exercise enhances mood and reduces stress, even in humans, but the mechanism remains elusive. 
This new research in rats gives us insight as to how stress reduction happens on a cellular and molecular level. We hope it will spur more research in this area, and motivate people to exercise more. 
We hope it will not be used as support to sell to humans some wacky drug, treatment, or herbal remedy that will claim to give us the same stress-reducing benefits without the bother of exercise. 
br GRETCHEN REYNOLDS SAYS: A wise comment, Jack. I think that most of the neurologists studying exercise and mood would completely agree with you. All of those with whom I spoke exercise regularly and none expressed any interest in finding a way to transform their research into a drug or medical intervention. They all said, in fact, they they hope their work spurs more people to exercise. 
That physical exercise enhances mood is common sense and motivation for anyone who does it.  I testify. Surely it’s  not ONLY the production of new brain cells.  For all  we know the fresh brain cells didn’t react to the lab stress because they hadn’t yet been adapted to the receptors and processes wrought of stress experience and chemicals? Maybe new cells get a “childhood” to grow and adapt or not worry about the stresses of mature life? (Veering into sci-fi I know here..) Another fertile research area will be discovering the neurotransmitter  processes of creation and application? And what are the chemical precursors and how might the elements and processes be understood and/or manipulated for healing effects? Ask the rodent brigade in Colorado to get back on these?  And a BIG shout out of thanks to the rats! Walking regularly to feel better works. 
I do jogging since I was 22 and by the way I ran two half-marathons during my PhD at Penn State Univ. Perhaps my healthy lifestyle has helped me to mold my professional career on brain performance. 
Nowadays I am pursuing a sort of ’scientific discovery’ in hydrodynamics bringing a revolution from classical Hydrology to the patenting system updating common knowledge and developing new conceptions of Unsaturated Hydraulic Flow as well as developing spatial geometry for porosity and fluid conduction based on biological porosity. 
Scientists were supposed to protect their own brain performance by adopting healthy lifestyles like this one on body fitness besides nutrition and many others. 
In a study of overcoming exercise resistance (n=1) ;-) I’ve discovered that when walking, there’s a surge of joy that occurs just about at the 2 mile marker which produces a boost  of energy to walk at least another 2 miles or more depending upon the weather. 
Regardless of how valid it is testing movement on rats and translating that info to humans I think the article sends a nice message.  1) being active is better than inactivity  2) activity helps us deal with stress better  3) results don’t come overnight - it takes at least several weeks before you see dividends.  Humans, unlike rats, can focus on contracting very specific muscle contractions to elicit a particular response.  If this is practiced the mental and physical response will be so much greater than the rats.  So take off the headphones, turn off the TV and stop looking around the gym at everyone else.  Focus on what you are doing! 
For advice on exercise or training in nyc  http://www.visionswellness.com 
Gretchen:  Once again another great article.  The New York Times health section is the runners hangout spot!!!!  And thank you so much for all your insightful reporting.  I can’t give all the science for why I enjoy running but I do have emotions on how it makes me feel.  On a great day when my 51 year old body is firing on all cylinders all the aspirations of my youth are back in motion.  The cerebral connection to the body is amazing!  You are, quite literally, brought out of your ordinary pace into a state of vigorous exuberance.  Yes, I know there’s all kinds of chemical reasons for this “exuberance.”  But feeling the exuberance is the “sine qua non” expression in one’s movement!  Your body isn’t static.  Your in flight and loving every minute of it!  There’s no drug that you can buy that can ever make you feel that way.  How wonderful that you can get that feeling just from putting your body in motion! 
GRETCHEN REYNOLDS SAYS: Thanks for the lovely commentary, Anthony. I’ve felt like that running (and during especially wonderful bike rides), too. It’s nice to have science now helping, at least in part, to tell us why. 
I feel totally relaxed after a marathon.. achy too.. but really relaxed.. 
I agree. It took me a while to get in the groove, but once I had a regular exercise routine I was much less stressed-out than before. Now that I’ve taken some time off due to treatment for an injury, I’ve noticed I’m more likely to get and stay stressed. Working out after a long day was a great way to burn off pent-up stress. 
Maybe it’s time for the insurance companies to get on board and realize the benefits that can be obtained from excercise and start covering “trackable” excercise programs. There is little doubt that this would reduce patient payout over the course of a patients life and thus save them money. 
As academic as it sounds, it appears now that we do really need prescriptions for excercise. 
“The New York Times health section is the runners hangout spot!!!!” 
Frankly, I wish the Times would publish posts specifically about running in a blog devoted to the topic, rather than lumping them in with posts about health news here in “Well.” That way, those of you who enjoy running would have your own “hangout spot.” 
I realize I may be outnumbered, though. So, unless something changes, I’ll keep on doing what I have been doing: skipping the posts about running that don’t pertain to my interests, and continuing to take long walks, as my doctor recommends. 
Signed, 
A former runner who hopes she won’t be “run off” of the blog! *grins* 
Time to reinstitute morning recess — done away with at some point in the late 80’s and early 90’s — as well as lunchtime recess in elementary school.  Time for kids who live less than a mile from school to walk there– along with their parents?  Time for a 6 hour work day so everyone will have time for beneficial exercise! (The plus to this is that it would also create employment.) 
Really interesting and important that these effects do these animals in findrxonline logically indicate that this study significantly advance science to improve the human body, really interesting and excellent information. 
we have to run - 
# 8, that’s a really thoughtless thing to say. 
An excellent, helpful, and persuasive article. (And a good example of why I would pay for a subscription to access this site. This is great, potentially life-changing stuff. ) I’m definitely more motivated to run, bike, and exercise more regularly - and for a longer duration. It seems that may be the key - to exercise for enough time to actually build new neurons. 
Thanks, everyone, for your enlightening posts. 
And let’s not forget about the underappreciated heroes in all of this: the rats themselves. What a contradiction that the creatures that tend to gross us out the most can make the biggest difference in our lives. 
30somethingsuburbanguy 
the30somethingsuburbanguy.blogspot.com 
Excellent article… but you don’t have to exercise in the athletic sense to experience some benefit.   I have found tremendous satisfaction and energy by incorporating as much exercise as I can into my day to day life.    Walk!  On those nice days get  off the bus a few stops early.   Avoid using your car. Take the stairs. Suck in your gut when you stand up. Every time you pick something up lift it two or three times. Get up from your chair regularly at the office. Work standing up.   Our modern lives no longer stress our physical ability to the degree that our bodies were designed for and our bodies have learned to be lazy and stressed out. Sure, go to the gym or run if you have time, but don’t overlook everyday opportunities to keep a kinetic component in your life Add your comments... 
Your Name            Required 
Your E-mail            Required, will not be published 
Your Comment 
Comments are moderated and generally will be posted if they are on-topic and not abusive. For more information, please see our  Comments FAQ .